Radical Prostatectomy Attributes

Three types:
1. Radical (open) prostatectomy - removes entire prostate and seminal vesicles.
Possible side-effects: sexual dysfunction, urinary incontinence, may require penile implants, further surgeries

2. Robotic or laproscopic prostatectomy - less invasive
less bleeding and pain, same general side-effects as number one.

3. Bilateral orchiectomy - removal of both testicles


incision care, dressing changes, and catheter care

Possible complications:
Intraoperative complications
Bleeding
rare (~1%)

Rectal injury
fewer than 1-11% of cases

Neurapraxia
Rare

Rhabdomyolysis
Rare

Cardiovascularcompromise
Rare

Immediate postoperative complications

Bladder spasms
Bladder spasms are common but rarely warrant anticholinergic therapy.

Wound infections
Infections are rare if patients are given preoperative antibiotic coverage.

Persistent wound drainage
Persistent urine leakage from the incision is managed with prolonged urethral catheterization. Fortunately, most cases are self-limited. Retrograde urethrography can be used to assess for continued leakage once the catheter is removed.

Scrotal hyperesthesia
The posterior aspect of the scrotum and the perineum anterior to the incision are sometimes hypersensitive for several weeks but rarely longer. Gabapentin is occasionally effective in reducing hypersensitivity until the cutaneous nerves recover.

Pulmonary embolism
Because the patient’s legs are elevated, gravity drainage, thigh-high thromboembolism-deterrent hose, sequential compression stockings, and early ambulation decrease the risk of deep venous thrombosis.

Cardiovascular effects
These adverse effects are not a typical concern unless unusual fluid shifts or blood loss occurred during surgery.

Delayed complications
Prolonged incontinence
Most patients eventually obtain complete urinary control. Prolonged urinary incontinence appears to be more common in patients older than 70 years. Furthermore, reported continence rates are similar for RPP and RRP.

Harris and Fischer reported good success rates using a running anastomosis and bladder neck–sparing techniques. [26] Social continence (0-1 pads/day) was maintained in 45%, 87%, and 98% of patients upon catheter removal, 4 months, and 1 year, respectively (see the image below). Weldon et al reported that 95% of their patients were dry 10 months after radical perineal prostatectomy, including all patients younger than 69 years. [27]
